Review
The Extraordinary Evolutionary Bond Between Dog and Human: The Zing 
Austin Mercado
Abstract
Canis Lupus Familiaris, a subspecies of Canis Lupus, commonly known as man’s best friend: the dog, have been part of humanity life for decades. Humans to dogs’ interactions stretches far back into time that is supported through past figures that resemble early Canis Lupus Linnaeus that have been painted across caves. The following research review articles will cover the recent and outstanding research done to prove coevolution interaction between the two parties that have occurred and positively affected human and Canis Lupus from different fields of study, perceptions, and past data collected through different studies. In addition, speaking on behalf of a new developed instinct that came to exist from those past interactions, partnerships, and relationships over the years of interactions that can simply become triggered just by a simple glare between a person to a puppy who share no history but yet feels a connection. 
Keywords: Coevolution, Artificial Selection, Natural Selection, Oxytocin, Homo Sapien, Canis Lupus, Taxonomy
Outstanding Questions
    1. How can researchers further prove the correlation between dog and humans’ coevolution?
        a. Researchers can study protein sequences to discover matches within varies of species to correlate similarities among the subspecies of Canis Lupus Linnaeus to draw closer to a conclusion. In addition, collecting observation data of the interspecific interactions to humans. 
    2. Did artificial selection interfere or inhibit the evolution growth of Canis Lupus?
        a. Although human controlled artificial selection based on favorable traits, much of the artificial selection resulted in a wider variation that society now have within the subspecies of Canis Lupus Familiaris. However, some of the variations have led to speculations on morals when it comes a few of selective breeds due to favorable characteristics to humans but potentially harmful features that could lead to further health problems to depending on the type of dog.  
    3. What presenting obstacles exist when conducting further research with dogs? 
        a. A presuming major obstacle that limits the rate of discovery is ethics; whether it is morally right to experiment on animals, types of experiments to conduct, and determining what the limitations.  
The Rooted Preface between the Two 
	For starters, both Homo Sapien and Canis Lupus although physically appear different, unite under common grounds, and share similar backgrounds for the matter of similar taxonym. In addition, Homo Sapiens, and Canis Lupus Familiaris have a long history with one another collaborating through varies of interactions and coevolving together. Throughout those varies of interactions, it rooted the foundation to a deeper inner connection that is analyzed to be a psychological reaction that chains into a physical reaction that Homo Sapiens and Canis Lupus Familaris now share proven through the varies of studies and trials; all which will further explored within the article.
Homo Sapien Evolution
	Transitioning to upon the topic of Homo Sapien, to expand further on Homo Sapiens, one much review the history as well as the taxonomy behind the upbringing of Homo Sapiens. When it comes to Homo Sapiens, they fall within these for the following classifications: domain is Eukaryota, kingdom is Metazoa, phylum is Chordata, subphylum is Vertebrata, class is Mammalia, order is Carnivora, suborder is Fissipeda, family is Canidae, genius is Canis, and species being of course, Homo Sapiens. As for the upbringing, it all begins with H. Erectus, through evolution, it would lead to H. Heiderlbergensis, and further through time it will finally lead to H.Sapiens who would migrate from Africa to farther continents. Due to the varies of environment conditions, it would result in the variation among H Sapiens. Those variations would define skin tone, body size, ligament sizes, and stronger immune strength; that being those who had a strong immune system to pass on to the next generation. To clarify, additional branches do exist including H. neanderthalensis and Denisovans, along with their individual varies of variations, but for the purpose to pursue under the research development of Homo Sapien, it will be push aside but not ignored or denied of its existence. Even to this today time, there remains small sequence of DNA presents of H. neanderthalensis shared among the society of Homo Sapiens. [1-2]
Canis Lupus Evolution 
	Same goes for Canis Lupus Familiaris, to further expand on this specie as well, one must discuss Canis Lupus Familiairis by noting the taxonomy for comparison; henceforth the following classifications: domain is Eukaryota, kingdom is Metazoa, phylum is Chordata, subphylum is Vertebrata, class is Mammalia, order is Primates, suborder is Haplorrhini, family is Horminidae, genius is Homo, and species being of course, Canis Lupus Familiaris. The origin of Canis Lupus Familiaris came to be from commonly known as the grey wolf, Canis Lupus; which proven by DNA were the sole ancestor despite past beliefs Canis Lupus Familiaris originated through hybridization cross between canids, jackals, and wolves. Many variations of Canis Lupus strived across the globe in locations, however when confronted with ecological changes, competition for resources, and new formation of geographic areas. It created harsh living conditions that harmed the count, resulting in many migrations outward toward different continents, which resulted in different variants and species of Canis Lupus that display different physical features like size, and color coats. Not until the interaction of Homo Sapiens did it then begin to turn from natural selection to artificial selection, which will further be discussed later in the article. [3-4]
Homo sapiens varies of interaction-
	Furthermore, Homo Sapiens and Canis Lupus Familiaris have shared varied of interactions that have been recorded through discovery such as cave painting as mentioned before. Those interactions mostly consist of mutualism and commensalism. The theorized origin of the two species companionship was believed when both species roamed the earth, a single Homo Sapiens gave in after developing a spontaneous instinct to tend to a Canis Lupus, afterward gaining the Canis Lupus trust, which would ultimately result in the spiral chain of collaboration between the two species as Homo Sapiens began to domesticate numbers of Canis Lupus. [5-6]
 When it comes to mutualism relations, many collected evidence that depict varies of subspecies of Canis Lupus to have assisted in collecting resources when it often came to hunting in various of environments whether it meant hunting within the harshest of conditions, which would ultimately affect both parties depending on whether they would get a successful game or not. Even as of today, many variations of Canis Lupus Familiaris assist many parts of society who remain in rural areas that are not easily accessible in islands and parts of land within the wilderness to assist their ways of life. [7-8]
As for commensalism, that includes utilizing dogs as sledge dogs, shepherding herds of farm animals, utilizing dogs as search dogs whether it comes to searching out for something far and wide or deep in the ground such as truffle that can only be found by dogs whereas the odds of a Homo Sapien finding a bit of truffle is little to none due to the distinct scent that is submerged down below that is suppress often by the moist dirt grounds that dogs can only pick up on. In some cases, among different cultures, antagonism occurs commonly as Canis Lupus Familiaris essentially could be used as a source of food, with that being considered, the end result was Canis Lupus Familiaris occasionally being consumed by Homo Sapiens in certain areas of the globe. [9]
As of recent study have determine, it has proven the correlation of utilizing Canis Lupus Familiaris for co-sleeping, hunting, and scavenging had much to do with the leading direction of their coevolution in contrast for other uses as they displayed low correlation results. Ultimately, the security the Homo Sapien provided by the means of resources, protection, and companionship were the leading reasons for Canis Lupis Familiaris to stay alongside their companion, as this trade convincing enough to ensure the two remain together. [10]
Through time, varies of variations began to diverge as mentioned before carrying unique features that were strong suited as a stronger fitness or suited as a weaker fitness that would be labeled as unfavorable when it comes to being utilized for hunting or scavenging. However, there was always alternative use of those many variations that carried weaker fitness features. Often creating association and roles to be assigned to those unfavorable variations. For example, in the case of a short, small dog, with stubby legs that would limit its ability to run due to the structure of its legs, it often was marketed up as a role of a at home emotional companion or type of dog that was considered an easier type of breed to maintain if one desires a selection breed of Canis Lupus Familiaris. Often enough in today time, some Homo Sapiens would obtain a dog to showcase one’s class or one’s possession. Which often was not the case in the past as they were often seen companions or partners rather than possessions. All which the many variations began to arise due to artificial selection, which would skyrocket closer to modern time when further study was done when it comes to the discovery of association of favorable phenotype to genotypes, frequently creating the set variations that are commonly known as breeds. As of result, it would lead to the mass selective breeding of popular selective breeds with an aim to add onto the favorable phenotypes, attempting to perfect a type of breed, which often lead to complications in fertility of types of breeds. Moreover, it led to more involvement of humans to intervene within the artificial selection wholly on the end goal to create functional breed for the specific job, assignment, task, or image to fulfill the astonishing breed model. Whether the Canis Lupus Familiaris displays much more obedient, perhaps appeal cuter to the masses of society, or maintain a wide body skeletal structure with massively muscles across its body to strike fear into others for protection. As of a result, it began to be closure of some variations as some breeds were often overbreed; dominating over others and creating suppressed breeds that would carry out to be recessive and uncommonly rarer due to mass inflation of overlapping pool of breeds. [11-14]
Correlation of Coevolution Between the Two
	Finally, as years of interactions over occurred along the years of time, study found Canis Lupus have developed an inherited bonding connection that both settles as a psychological response and physical response within the brain molecule, Oxytocin. Higher levels of Oxytocin is present within females Homo Sapiens, henceforth reason for claim that females bare a stronger connection in contrast to male Homo Sapiens; all which gets trigger by a simple glare between both Homo Sapien and Canis Lupus Familiaris; often referred to as Oxytocin-Gaze or the zing. Furthermore, Oxytocin, a neuropeptide that is often referred to as the love drug, enables one Homo Sapien expression of affection toward a Canis Lupus Familiaris. Through tests and studies, it was found the zing was often stronger among Canis Lupus Familiaris to Homo Sapiens, yet when paired Canis Lupus paired to Homo Sapiens, drastically less Oxytocin was released by either party whether the pairs acknowledge one prior to the study or nor. In addition, Canis Lupus developed better comprehension skills of social cues when interacting with Homo Sapiens, which proven to be much stronger when signaling about food in case studies where a Homo Sapien attempt to relay the idea of hidden food to a Canis Lupus Famiiliaris. Which comes to be believed from Canis Lupus long processing entrustments through the years that make them no longer fear Homo Sapiens, adapted learning curve to responding to humans’ social cues through observing, matching reactions, and responding to social gestures such as pointing, head turning, bowing, and further connection through eye gazing, the zing. As well as sensing a Homo Sapien odor, which is not visual social cue, but rather sensory cue that one must sense. [15-17]
Concluding Remark
In conclusion, Homo Sapiens have much alike to dogs, whether it be small amounts of DNA sequences, tiny bits of anatomical structure, or the survival instinct to work alongside one another; having to collaborate to have a share in resources when there was much competition, danger, and protecting one another in dangerous environment; often hunting and scavenging was the most occurring reason for aliments between the two in the past time. Now more than ever, they are multitasked with varies of jobs to sniff out contraband among travels, providing chest compression to one partner, providing comfort for individuals who even perhaps suffer spontaneous panic attacks, “rescue” Homo Sapiens from drowning within their own bath tub, or perhaps so much more as the lists of jobs continue to grow. With all these examples of accomplished partnerships, it defines the sociological importance of pursuing further research toward understanding dogs and their interconnections to humans to better junction the two species much more efficiently. By further studying dogs through case studies, more responsibilities and tasks can be trained onto dogs due to their enhanced abilities to contribute out more to today society along the fields of health, security, and being an entirely resourceful contribution to today society. Further study is possible but as mentioned before, ethics is a limiting factor that can inhibit further study because controversy has risen over researchers’ methods that question whether the study being done are an example of improper use of dogs. In addition, one may believe that it may psychologically or physically harm the dog or classify under cruelty due to holding a stronger emotion connection to the Canis Lupus Familiaris that often has much to do to the pre-developed numbers of Oxytocin within an individual; a possible factor that contribute to their understanding of righteousness and wrongfulness threshold boundaries. Often enough, precautions will ensure be implemented which will require more time, confirmation by other colleagues to continue forward, and additional assessments to ensure both precise and accurate results, with the addition of maintaining overview of study to ensure not to overstep the presenting threshold created to prevent breaking ethics. As of result, the extra precautions will result in further research deadlines to become stretched out farther outward along the timeline permitted, which ultimately comes to be determined on dependence variables; those being time and total funding allowance toward the project. 
Figure 1: The purpose of the diagram is to relay the coevolution interaction over the time span and the slowly developing connection between Homo Sapiens and Canis Lupus Linnaeus. 

Homo Sapiens
Canis Lupus Familiaris 
Domain
Eukaryota
Eukaryota
Kingdom
Metazoa
Metazoa
Phylum
Chordata
Chordata
Subphylum
Vertebrata
Vertebrata
Class
Mammalia
Mammalia
Order
Primates
Carnivora
Suborder
Haplorrhini
Fissipeda
Family 
Hominidae
Canidae
Genius
Homo
Canis
Species
Homo Sapiens
Canis lupus familiaris
Table 1: Listed in the table above is the Taxonomy Table between the two for comparison. 
Glossary
Coevolution
The influence of two different species to one another within evolution.
Oxytocin
A hormonal chemical messenger often referred to as love drug produced by the hypothalamus and released into the bloodstream by the pituitary gland.
Mutualism 
A relation where both partners benefits.
Commensalism
A relation where one partner benefits and the other is not affected.
Taxonomy
The classification of an organism.
Social Cues
Verbal or Non-Verbal body language to express one’s emotion.
References 
    1. Chambers, Jaime, Marsha B. Quinlan, Alexis Evans, and Robert J. Quinlan, (2020), ‘Dog-Human Coevolution: Cross-Cultural Analysis of Multiple Hypotheses’, Journal of Ethnobiology, 40.4 <https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-0771-40.4.414>
    2. Cunningham-Smith, Petra, and Kitty Emery, (2020), ‘Dogs and People: Exploring the Human-Dog Connection’, Journal of Ethnobiology, 40.4 <https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-0771-40.4.409>
    3. Fiset, Sylvain, (2015), ‘Commentary: Oxytocin-Gaze Positive Loop and the Coevolution of Human-Dog Bonds’, Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 3
    4. Jouventin, Pierre, Yves Christen, and Stephen Dobson, (2016), ‘Altruism in Wolves Explains the Coevolution of Dogs and Wolves’, Ideas in Ecology and Evolution, 9 <https://doi.org/10.4033/iee.2016.9.2.n
    5. Kekecs, Zoltan, (2016) ‘Commentary: Oxytocin-Gaze Positive Loop and the Coevolution of Human–Dog Bonds’, Frontiers in Neuroscience, 10, 3
    6. Nagasawa, Miho, Shouhei Mitsui, Shiori En, Nobuyo Ohtani, Mitsuaki Ohta, Yasuo Sakuma, and others, (2015), ‘Oxytocin-Gaze Positive Loop and the Coevolution of Human-Dog Bonds’, Science, 348.6232 (2015), 333–36 <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261022>
    7. Reid, Pamela J., (2009), ‘Adapting to the Human World: Dogs’ Responsiveness to Our Social Cues’, Behavioural Processes, 80.3, 325–33 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2008.11.002>
    8. Schleidt, Wolfgang M, and Michael D Shalter, ‘Co-Evolution of Humans and Canids’, 16
    9. MacLean, E. L., and Hare, B. (2015). Dogs hijack the human bonding pathway. Science 348, 280–281. doi: 10.1126/science.aab1200
    10. Call et al., 2003 J. Call, J. Bräuer, J. Kaminski, M. Tomasello (2003), Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) are sensitive to the attentional state of humans Journal of Comparative Psychology, 117, pp. 257-263
    11. Clutton-Brock, 1995 J. Clutton-Brock, (1995), Origins of the dog: domestication and early history J. Serpell (Ed.), The Domestic Dog: Its Evolution, Behaviour and Interactions with People, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
    12. Coppinger and Coppinger, (2001) R. Coppinger, L. Coppinger Dogs: A Startling New Understanding of Canine Origin, Behaviour, and Evolution Scribner, NY
    13. Miklósi  et al., (2003) Á. Miklósi, E. Kubinyi, J. Topál, M. Gácsi, Z. Virányi, V. Csányi A simple reason for a big difference: wolves do not look back at humans, but dogs do Current Biology, 13, pp. 763-766
    14. Derr, M. (1997) Dog’s Best Friend: Annals of the Dog–Human Relationship. Henry Holt: New York.
    15. Wynne et al., (2008) C.D.L. Wynne, M.A.R. Udell, K.A. Lord Ontogeny's impact on human–dog communication Animal Behaviour, 76 (2008), pp. e1-e4
    16. Ersmark, Erik, Cornelya F. C. Klütsch, Yvonne L. Chan, Mikkel-Holger S. Sinding, Steven R. Fain, Natalia A. Illarionova, and others, (2016)  ‘From the Past to the Present: Wolf Phylogeography and Demographic History Based on the Mitochondrial Control Region’, Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 4 <https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2016.00134>
    17. Stringer C. The origin and evolution of Homo sapiens. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Jul 5;371(1698):20150237. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0237. PMID: 27298468; PMCID: PMC4920294.
